---
title: An Incomplete History Of Modern ITG
description: 
published: 1
date: 2023-07-29T15:57:40.626Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-07-27T01:22:41.869Z
---

# An Incomplete History of Modern ITG
> This is going to start off as a total mess, but I need a place to thoughtdump everything I've learned in my research about this topic into one place, so I can get it all lined up into a cohesive timeline, explore the causes and effects of each "chapter" of the game's history, and better trace how everything trickled down into the future to shape the game as we know it today.
Buckle up, nerds. This is going to get messy.
{.is-info}

## Origin and Purpose
In recent years, ITG/Pad Stepmania has experienced a sort of renaissance in popularity and outreach. With ever more global connectivity and ways to play at home, a new generation of players has been born and is growing more and more in the grassroots game we know and love. However, one thing that has always bothered me is how much information and history that I (or others) consider "common knowledge" about the game is simply unknown to new players and content creators. Given how much Modern ITG's foundation was innovated by, based on, and extrapolated from community decision-making and historic events (including everything from tournament format standards, chart design conventions, and playstyle differences), it is unfortunate that there exists no manner of documenting and communicating all of the knowledge and background information in the game and community beyond word of mouth. Perhaps this is why we call it "lore."

What I (Chief Skittles) have wanted to do for some time is to create some sort of documentary video, or podcast, or other listenable media that would elucidate the origins behind a lot of the game and design conventions that have become such an intrinsic part of the meta today that new players or community members are likely to take them as "common knowledge" without understanding *why* they are as they are. However, what I've inadvertantly backed myself into is the scope creep of nightmares - there's simply so *so much* information that I find important, interesting, fascinating, or somehow connected to other facets of the game that I don't even know where to begin with what I want to say, much less form a cohesive thread of thought to base a single piece of media on, video or otherwise.

This document is intended to serve as a single place where I can, in great detail, develop a timeline of Modern ITG as a whole, tracing the path of history from the time of the earliest data I can find, (pre-r21 patch) to the current era, exploring as much of the game as I possibly can to explain how we ended up as we are now. I fully anticipate this to take an exceptional amount of time, despite having all of the information floating haphazardly in my brain, so I beg your patience as I develop this page.

## The Early Days - The r21 Patch & The Beginning of Customs
In order to properly discuss the current state of ITG, it's important to circle back and discuss where we came from. In this case, I'll dispense with discussing "official" ITG content, except where necessary, and instead focus on the advent and rise of custom charts. When the r21 patch first dropped (October 11, 2006) and custom charts became more accessible for play on arcade ITG2 cabinets (which, it is important to note, was the only way of playing pad ITG/Stepmania at the time), the sentiment around them was far from the acceptance and normalcy we see today. For a long time, custom charts were seen as, at best, a fun diversion from the "real" charts - that is, officials. Even for some years after r21 was released and Roxor was sued by Konami, most players and the majority of competitive events focused solely on officials.

For the most part, the biggest appeal of customs was playing charts beyond the difficulty limit of the base game. There was certainly appeal in grinding officials for score, especially considering the substantially lower average skill level of the player base relative to modern times. However, many players simply wanted to play more challenging, physically aggressive content on pad, just to see if it was possible for them to pass. At the time, there was only one "type" of hard content available - Keyboard charts. Despite not being designed for pad play, many aspiring players found that certain charts, if not all of them, were entirely possible to play on pad, with great effort. Charts such as Skor's "Emerald Sword", DukAmok's "Holy Orders", and Toph's "murmur twins," all released in May 2005, as part of Community Keyboard Megapack Volume 1, are some examples of keyboard Stepmania charts that were popularly played by the hard/custom song scene in its infancy after the r21 patch. Being that the chart-writing "meta" and numerous design conventions we take as standard in pad charts today simply didn't exist, the quality of the charts relative to pad play wasn't entirely relevant to the player base. They were simply new things to play that were challenging without being physically impractical.

This drive to play harder and harder songs on pad was far from a community standard at the time. As mentioned earlier, attempting to pass these keyboard charts was, at best, seen as an interesting accomplishment, and at worst, outright mocked as being "irrelevant" to the zeitgeist of playing the "actual" game well. A bit of a stigma began to develop against people who solely played for passes on harder content, and it was only when some players (such as Calimist) began to truly excel at passing (at the time) extremely hard charts that the majority of players began to acknowledge those accomplishments. But even still, the divide remained - keyboard charts were the impressive-but-unimportant side gig, and the *real* game was still playing officials.

Only with the passing of time, and the advent of writing charts *specifically* for pad play (thanks to the r21 patch), did custom charts begin to make some headway in the community mentality. Step artists such as WhiteDrMario and v0idKeng paved the way and began setting the first standards for "quality" pad content at more approachable difficulty levels, taking inspiration from highly-skilled keyboard chart writers and adapting some of the conventions they innovated, such as Toph's idea of assigning specific step sequences and patterns to specific sounds or motifs in the music. Indeed, it was there that the first seeds of "musically-relevant patterning" began to blossom, and the increasing popularity of these step authors and their content, coupled with the general community slowly growing weary of playing the same batch of "relevant" officials over and over, that custom charts began to carve out a small, but ever-so-slightly respected, niche in the community mindset.

As an aside, it cannot be overstated how much effort and dedication was required to create stepcharts at this time. All of the tools that we frequently use (and take for granted) today were not even twinkles in their respective creators' eyes at this time in history. ArrowVortex was far from even conceptualized, being initially release in 2016, Reaper DAW was fresh out of development, released in August 2006, and while Audacity, another commonly used tool for audio editing, had been publicly available since 2000, the depth of knowledge shared throughout the community now, as well as the general standards for audio cutting and pad file design, simply was not present yet. The most common "DDR Emulator" prior to 2005 wasn't even Stepmania - it was Dance With Intensity, a "DDR Clone" released in December 2000. The most regularly-used tool for making stepcharts during this era? *Notepad.* Stepcharts were created by manually typing out the "raw step data" in Notepad to be played on keyboard in DWI. Even the simple concept of viewing or playing segments of charts in Edit Mode wasn't a possibility. Testing stepcharts, whether checking the sync or playing through new additions to the file, required the chart to be played in Game Mode, from start to finish, each and every time. With all of these restrictions, it's almost shocking to believe any content at all was created at this time, much less files that were well-loved on both keyboard *and* pad play! This speaks to the level of dedication and passion these early trailblazers had for the game, as well as how innovative their contributions to the later scene were.

## The Fort Rapids Era - 